# -Residential-Water-Demand-
This repository has the models estimated that support the manuscript Chovar et al. (2023) "Estimating Residential  Water Demand under Systematic Shifts between Uniforme Pirces (UP) and Increasing Block Tariffs (IBT)".  Working paper.

ABSTRACT
We evaluate whether changing from a uniform price (UP) to an increasing block tariff (IBT) changes people´s behavior. We exploit a unique setting in which the price scheme moves back and forth from  UP to IBT yearly.  Our paper addresses the effectiveness of IBT in reducing summer consumption. This issue is relevant to many countries and policymakers interested in designing tariff structures. There is no evidence of how the same consumer may react to systematically switching from one tariff structure to another yearly.  We estimate the residential water demand and its price elasticity using a generalized least squared (GLS) random effect model for the UP and the Discrete/continuous choice (DCC) model for the IBT. We split the sample between low and high-consumption groups and between summer and nonsummer months. For the low consumption group unaffected by the tariff change, the elasticity in the nonsummer months is lower (more inelastic) than in the summer.   Consumers in this group reduce their elasticity from nonsummer to summer months (-0.299 vs. -0.071, respectively) and increase their consumption by 13%. The high consumption group increased its summer consumption, but only by 8.7%, and contrary to the first group, its elasticity increased significantly (from -0.299 to -0.568). The high-consumption group is indeed affected by the change in tariff.  From a policy perspective, this implies that the IBT structure is relevant. However, it needs to be adjusted to a lower percentile of the water consumption distribution to affect a more significant portion of the population if one wants to increase water conservation.
